README.md, before:

# Node.js express.js MongoDB JWT REST API - Basic Project Skeleton

[![Author](http://img.shields.io/badge/author-@davellanedam-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://twitter.com/davellanedam)
[![Software License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton/blob/master/LICENSE)
[![Tag](https://img.shields.io/github/tag/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton/tags)
[![Travis](https://img.shields.io/travis/com/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton.svg?style=flat-square)](<>)
[![npm downloads](https://img.shields.io/npm/dt/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton.svg?style=flat-square&label=npm%20downloads)](<>)
[![Codacy Badge](https://api.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/fb6f20533c0f41b6b00da95ba634cd5e)](https://www.codacy.com/app/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton?utm_source=github.com&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton&utm_campaign=Badge_Grade)

## Getting started

This is a basic API REST skeleton written on JavaScript using async/await. Great for building an MVP for your front-end app (Vue, react, angular, or anything that can consume an API)

This project is created to help other developers create a **basic REST API in an easy way with Node.js**. This basic example shows how powerful and simple JavaScript can be. Do you want to contribute? Pull requests are always welcome to show more features.

## Donate

Hi! I'm Daniel Avellaneda, I'm currently an open source enthusiast and dedicate my free time to open source projects.

I'm the creator and maintainer of [node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton](https://github.com/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton/blob/master/README.md) and [vue-skeleton-mvp](https://github.com/davellanedam/vue-skeleton-mvp/blob/master/README.md) both with thousands of downloads. These projects are what I call a Free starter web app combo: API + Frontend.

I'm doing my best to provide you a good experience when using my apps, so if you like what I'm doing and wish to say "thanks!", feel free to buy me a coffee :coffee:

<a href="https://www.buymeacoffee.com/muGHf41NT" target="_blank"><img src="https://www.buymeacoffee.com/assets/img/custom_images/orange_img.png" alt="Buy Me A Coffee" style="height: auto !important;width: auto !important;" ></a>

Feel free to send me a tweet <https://twitter.com/davellanedam>, share this with others or make a pull request

## Features

-   Multiple environment ready (development, production)
-   Custom email/password user system with basic security and blocking for preventing brute force attacks.
-   Compressed responses.
-   Secured HTTP headers.
-   CORS ready.
-   Cache ready (Redis)
-   HTTP request logger in development mode.
-   i18n ready (for sending emails in multiple languages)
-   User roles.
-   Pagination ready.
-   User profile.
-   Users list for admin area.
-   Cities model and controller example.
-   Login access log with IP, browser and country location (for country it looks for the header `cf-ipcountry` that CloudFlare creates when protecting your website).
-   API autogenerated documentation by Postman.
-   API collection example for Postman.
-   Testing with mocha/chai for API endpoints.
-   NPM scripts for cleaning and seeding the MongoDB database.
-   NPM script for keeping good source code formatting using prettier and ESLint.
-   Use of ESLint for good coding practices.
-   Mailer example with Nodemailer and Mailgun.
-   JWT Tokens, make requests with a token after login with `Authorization` header with value `Bearer yourToken` where `yourToken` is the **signed and encrypted token** given in the response from the login process.

## Requirements

-   Node.js **8+**
-   MongoDB **3.6+**
-   Redis **5.0+**

## Demo

A demo of this API is located at: <https://api-demo.daniel-avellaneda.com>

### Login credentials

email: `admin@admin.com`  
password: `12345`

**IMPORTANT:** Database resets every 30 mins like "12:00am, 12:30am, 1:00am" and so on. So anything you do with the API will be lost after a short time.

[API documentation](###api-documentation)  
[Postman API example collection](###postman-api-example-collection)  
If you want to test it don´t forget to change the server variable to:  
`https://api-demo.daniel-avellaneda.com`

Demo is also linked to a VueJS project that shows how this API can be integrated to a frontend that is able to consume an API.  
Repo is here: <https://github.com/davellanedam/vue-skeleton-mvp>  
Running demo is here: <https://vue-demo.daniel-avellaneda.com>

## How to install

### Using Git (recommended)

1.  Clone the project from github. Change "myproject" to your project name.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton.git ./myproject
```

### Using manual download ZIP

1.  Download repository
2.  Uncompress to your desired directory

### Install npm dependencies after installing (Git or manual download)

```bash
cd myproject
npm install
npm update
```

### Setting up environments (development or production)

1.  In the root this repository you will find a file named `.env.example`
2.  Create a new file by copying and pasting the file and then renaming it to just `.env`
3.  The file `.env` is already ignored, so you never commit your credentials.
4.  Change the values of the file to your environment (development or production)
5.  Upload the `.env` to your environment server(development or production)
6.  If you use the postman collection to try the endpoints, change value of the variable `server` on your environment to the url of your server, for development mode use <http://localhost:3000>

### Mailer

To ensure the deliverability of emails sent by this API, `Mailgun` is used for mailing users when they sign up, so if you want to use that feature go sign up at their website <https://www.mailgun.com>

If you want to try a different method it´s ok, I used <https://nodemailer.com> for this API and they have different transport methods like: smtp.

### i18n

Language is automatically detected from `Accept-Language` header on the request. So either you send locale manually on the request or your browser will send its default, if `Accept-Language` header is not sent then it will use `en` locale as default.

## How to run

### Database cleaning and seeding samples

There are 3 available commands for this: `fresh`, `clean` and `seed`.

```bash
npm run command
```

-   `fresh` cleans and then seeds the database with dynamic data.
-   `clean` cleans the database.
-   `seed` seeds the database with dynamic data.

### Running in development mode (lifting API server)

```bash
npm run dev
```

You will know server is running by checking the output of the command `npm run dev`

```bash
****************************
*    Starting Server
*    Port: 3000
*    NODE_ENV: development
*    Database: MongoDB
*    DB Connection: OK
****************************
```

### Running tests

It´s a good practice to do tests at your code, so a sample of how to do that in `mocha/chai` is also included in the `/test` directory

```bash
npm run test
```

### Formatting code

Format your code with prettier by typing:

```bash
npm run format
```

### Formatting markdown files

Format all your markdown files with remark by typing:

```bash
npm run remark
```

### Linting code

Lint your code with ESLint by typing:

```bash
npm run lint
```

## Usage

Once everything is set up to test API routes either use Postman or any other api testing application. Default username/password combination for login is `admin@admin.com/12345`.

### API documentation

<https://documenter.getpostman.com/view/487539/RWaHwoLV>

### Postman API example collection

You can import the example collection to Postman

<https://www.getpostman.com/collections/d1e27b60e0ccff22a516>

If you use Postman please go to `manage environments` and then create one for each of your servers (Ex. myApi-LOCAL, myApi-PRODUCTION).

On each of the environments you create you will need to:

1.  Create a new key `authToken` with `token` value (the token you got from the login process), each time you make a request to the API it will send `Authorization` header with the token value in the request, you can check this on the headers of users or cities endpoints in the Postman example.
2.  Create a second key `server` with the url of your server, for development mode use <http://localhost:3000>

This is a REST API, so it works using the following HTTP methods:

-   GET (Read): Gets a list of items, or a single item
-   POST (Create): Creates an item
-   PATCH (Update): Updates an item
-   DELETE: Deletes an item

### Creating new models

If you need to add more models to the project just create a new file in `/app/models/` and it will be loaded dynamically.

### Creating new routes

If you need to add more routes to the project just create a new file in `/app/routes/` and it will be loaded dynamically.

### Creating new controllers

When you create a new controller file, try to also create another file with validations. Ex. `countries.js` `countries.validate.js` An example of this is included in the repository.

## Bugs or improvements

Feel free to report any bugs or improvements. Pull requests are always welcome.

## License

This project is open-sourced software licensed under the MIT License. See the LICENSE file for more information.

Commit message:

README.md added refresh token feature

README.md, after:

# Node.js express.js MongoDB JWT REST API - Basic Project Skeleton

[![Author](http://img.shields.io/badge/author-@davellanedam-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://twitter.com/davellanedam)
[![Software License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton/blob/master/LICENSE)
[![Tag](https://img.shields.io/github/tag/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton.svg?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton/tags)
[![Travis](https://img.shields.io/travis/com/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton.svg?style=flat-square)](<>)
[![npm downloads](https://img.shields.io/npm/dt/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton.svg?style=flat-square&label=npm%20downloads)](<>)
[![Codacy Badge](https://api.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/fb6f20533c0f41b6b00da95ba634cd5e)](https://www.codacy.com/app/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton?utm_source=github.com&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton&utm_campaign=Badge_Grade)

## Getting started

This is a basic API REST skeleton written on JavaScript using async/await. Great for building an MVP for your front-end app (Vue, react, angular, or anything that can consume an API)

This project is created to help other developers create a **basic REST API in an easy way with Node.js**. This basic example shows how powerful and simple JavaScript can be. Do you want to contribute? Pull requests are always welcome to show more features.

## Donate

Hi! I'm Daniel Avellaneda, I'm currently an open source enthusiast and dedicate my free time to open source projects.

I'm the creator and maintainer of [node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton](https://github.com/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton/blob/master/README.md) and [vue-skeleton-mvp](https://github.com/davellanedam/vue-skeleton-mvp/blob/master/README.md) both with thousands of downloads. These projects are what I call a Free starter web app combo: API + Frontend.

I'm doing my best to provide you a good experience when using my apps, so if you like what I'm doing and wish to say "thanks!", feel free to buy me a coffee :coffee:

<a href="https://www.buymeacoffee.com/muGHf41NT" target="_blank"><img src="https://www.buymeacoffee.com/assets/img/custom_images/orange_img.png" alt="Buy Me A Coffee" style="height: auto !important;width: auto !important;" ></a>

Feel free to send me a tweet <https://twitter.com/davellanedam>, share this with others or make a pull request

## Features

-   Multiple environment ready (development, production)
-   Custom email/password user system with basic security and blocking for preventing brute force attacks.
-   Compressed responses.
-   Secured HTTP headers.
-   CORS ready.
-   Cache ready (Redis).
-   HTTP request logger in development mode.
-   Ability to refresh token
-   i18n ready (for sending emails in multiple languages).
-   User roles.
-   Pagination ready.
-   User profile.
-   Users list for admin area.
-   Cities model and controller example.
-   Login access log with IP, browser and country location (for country it looks for the header `cf-ipcountry` that CloudFlare creates when protecting your website).
-   API autogenerated documentation by Postman.
-   API collection example for Postman.
-   Testing with mocha/chai for API endpoints.
-   NPM scripts for cleaning and seeding the MongoDB database.
-   NPM script for keeping good source code formatting using prettier and ESLint.
-   Use of ESLint for good coding practices.
-   Mailer example with Nodemailer and Mailgun.
-   JWT Tokens, make requests with a token after login with `Authorization` header with value `Bearer yourToken` where `yourToken` is the **signed and encrypted token** given in the response from the login process.

## Requirements

-   Node.js **8+**
-   MongoDB **3.6+**
-   Redis **5.0+**

## Demo

A demo of this API is located at: <https://api-demo.daniel-avellaneda.com>

### Login credentials

email: `admin@admin.com`  
password: `12345`

**IMPORTANT:** Database resets every 30 mins like "12:00am, 12:30am, 1:00am" and so on. So anything you do with the API will be lost after a short time.

[API documentation](###api-documentation)  
[Postman API example collection](###postman-api-example-collection)  
If you want to test it don´t forget to change the server variable to:  
`https://api-demo.daniel-avellaneda.com`

Demo is also linked to a VueJS project that shows how this API can be integrated to a frontend that is able to consume an API.  
Repo is here: <https://github.com/davellanedam/vue-skeleton-mvp>  
Running demo is here: <https://vue-demo.daniel-avellaneda.com>

## How to install

### Using Git (recommended)

1.  Clone the project from github. Change "myproject" to your project name.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/davellanedam/node-express-mongodb-jwt-rest-api-skeleton.git ./myproject
```

### Using manual download ZIP

1.  Download repository
2.  Uncompress to your desired directory

### Install npm dependencies after installing (Git or manual download)

```bash
cd myproject
npm install
npm update
```

### Setting up environments (development or production)

1.  In the root this repository you will find a file named `.env.example`
2.  Create a new file by copying and pasting the file and then renaming it to just `.env`
3.  The file `.env` is already ignored, so you never commit your credentials.
4.  Change the values of the file to your environment (development or production)
5.  Upload the `.env` to your environment server(development or production)
6.  If you use the postman collection to try the endpoints, change value of the variable `server` on your environment to the url of your server, for development mode use <http://localhost:3000>

**IMPORTANT:** By default token expires in 3 days (4320 minutes set in .env.example). You can refresh token at endpoint POST /token and sending the token as a param. If everythong it´s ok you will get a new token.

### Mailer

To ensure the deliverability of emails sent by this API, `Mailgun` is used for mailing users when they sign up, so if you want to use that feature go sign up at their website <https://www.mailgun.com>

If you want to try a different method it´s ok, I used <https://nodemailer.com> for this API and they have different transport methods like: smtp.

### i18n

Language is automatically detected from `Accept-Language` header on the request. So either you send locale manually on the request or your browser will send its default, if `Accept-Language` header is not sent then it will use `en` locale as default.

## How to run

### Database cleaning and seeding samples

There are 3 available commands for this: `fresh`, `clean` and `seed`.

```bash
npm run command
```

-   `fresh` cleans and then seeds the database with dynamic data.
-   `clean` cleans the database.
-   `seed` seeds the database with dynamic data.

### Running in development mode (lifting API server)

```bash
npm run dev
```

You will know server is running by checking the output of the command `npm run dev`

```bash
****************************
*    Starting Server
*    Port: 3000
*    NODE_ENV: development
*    Database: MongoDB
*    DB Connection: OK
****************************
```

### Running tests

It´s a good practice to do tests at your code, so a sample of how to do that in `mocha/chai` is also included in the `/test` directory

```bash
npm run test
```

### Formatting code

Format your code with prettier by typing:

```bash
npm run format
```

### Formatting markdown files

Format all your markdown files with remark by typing:

```bash
npm run remark
```

### Linting code

Lint your code with ESLint by typing:

```bash
npm run lint
```

## Usage

Once everything is set up to test API routes either use Postman or any other api testing application. Default username/password combination for login is `admin@admin.com/12345`.

### API documentation

<https://documenter.getpostman.com/view/487539/RWaHwoLV>

### Postman API example collection

You can import the example collection to Postman

<https://www.getpostman.com/collections/d1e27b60e0ccff22a516>

If you use Postman please go to `manage environments` and then create one for each of your servers (Ex. myApi-LOCAL, myApi-PRODUCTION).

On each of the environments you create you will need to:

1.  Create a new key `authToken` with `token` value (the token you got from the login process), each time you make a request to the API it will send `Authorization` header with the token value in the request, you can check this on the headers of users or cities endpoints in the Postman example.
2.  Create a second key `server` with the url of your server, for development mode use <http://localhost:3000>

This is a REST API, so it works using the following HTTP methods:

-   GET (Read): Gets a list of items, or a single item
-   POST (Create): Creates an item
-   PATCH (Update): Updates an item
-   DELETE: Deletes an item

### Creating new models

If you need to add more models to the project just create a new file in `/app/models/` and it will be loaded dynamically.

### Creating new routes

If you need to add more routes to the project just create a new file in `/app/routes/` and it will be loaded dynamically.

### Creating new controllers

When you create a new controller file, try to also create another file with validations. Ex. `countries.js` `countries.validate.js` An example of this is included in the repository.

## Bugs or improvements

Feel free to report any bugs or improvements. Pull requests are always welcome.

## License

This project is open-sourced software licensed under the MIT License. See the LICENSE file for more information.
